---
title: website
date: 2022-03-21 13:00
draft: false
tags: ["website", "hugo", "github", "github-actions", "dns"]
---

This is an explanation of how this website is built for future reference.
Short story: The pages are written in Markdown and the respective HTML website is automatically generated by a static site generator ([Hugo](https://gohugo.io/)) every time I push to github (using [github actions](https://github.com/peaceiris/actions-gh-pages)).

Although it looks like one website, each part (the main site, Kuchenwiki, Zettel) are actually created and maintained as separate websites, just using the same design and nearly identical settings.

One of my goals was to have a minimum of externally loaded content and style files, so I tried to incude everything in the website itself.
I also do not use any cookies or tracking, these websites are mostly for personal reference and have no commercial interest.

### Using hugo

**[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/)** is a static site generator (written in Go) that transforms Markdown content into html and css with some associated style files.

Each content page is a simple text file in Markdown format stored in the `content/` folder (see e.g. [here](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax) for a reference of the syntax)

Using some layout files allows to define how the generated html files will look like.
In my case I took the [pulp theme](https://github.com/koirand/pulp/), cloned that repo to the `themes/` folder and only slightly modified it (some details see below).

To generate the site locally, the `hugo` command can be invoked, which by default builds the site into the `public/` directory.
Alternatively, a small server can be started by `hugo server -D`.
This produces the site on `http:://localhost:1313` (by default) and will regenerate it after all relevant file changes automatically.

The contents of the `public/` folder could now simply be moved to your hosting server to make the website available to the public.
Instead I chose to host it at github pages and leave the site generation also to github.


### Github pages and deploying via github actions

I use github actions to make a github runner build the site automatically whenever I push to the `publish` branch.

Go to the settings of the repository, and under *Pages* enable the branch `gh-pages` and its root directory to be published.

Then add a custom action script (I named it `publish.yml`) under `.github/workflows/`:
{{< highlight yml >}}
name: 🚀 Publish Github Pages

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - publish
jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - name: Git checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
        with:
          submodules: true

      - name: Setup hugo
        uses: peaceiris/actions-hugo@v2
        with:
          hugo-version: 'latest'

      - name: Build
        run: hugo

      - name: 🚀 Deploy to GitHub pages
        uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v3
        with:
          github_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          publish_branch: gh-pages
          publish_dir: ./public
          force_orphan: true
{{< /highlight >}}

This will be triggered every time I push to the `publish` branch and run 4 steps:

  1. checkout the websites repo
  2. setup the hugo generator
  3. generate the site with hugo
  4. publish the content of the `./public` directory to the root of the `gh-pages` branch

You can see that I rely on github actions by [peaceiris](https://github.com/peaceiris/actions-gh-pages/) to do the most crucial steps (setting up hugo and deploying).
See also there for some technical details (like the [first Deployment when using `GITHUB_TOKEN`](https://github.com/peaceiris/actions-gh-pages#%EF%B8%8F-first-deployment-with-github_token)).
This simple setup allows to forget about most hassle and works pretty well, as long as the website is small (if not, you'd likely not want to regenerate the full website at every commit).






### Mathjax for math typesetting

To get LaTeX-like typesetting of mathematical formulas, I use [**MathJax**](http://docs.mathjax.org/en/latest/index.html).

The pulp theme loads mathjax v2.7 which has meanwhile been superceded by v3.
It also did no longer work correctly for me out of the box and relies on embedding the remote mathjax code.

#### Locally host Mathjax on the website
Therefore I [cloned the current mathjax repo](http://docs.mathjax.org/en/latest/web/hosting.html#getting-mathjax-via-git) to obtain the current version.
You then need to decide which functionality you want to use.
Go to the `es5` folder of the cloned repo and copy the desired parts to a custom folder of your website (under `static/`, e.g. `static/mathjax/`).
I only want support for TeX-like syntax, so I chose the `tex-chtml.js` file and the `input/` files related to TeX as well as the `output/` files related to chtml.
Copying this enlarges the repository by (in my case) `2.2 MB` but I think that is still bearable.


#### Setup Mathjax in hugo
After I now host a Mathjax copy on the website, the next goal is to make it available for hugo.
Following [the mathjax docs](http://docs.mathjax.org/en/latest/web/configuration.html#web-configuration) I converted the old configuration to v3, and put that into a `mathjax.html` file under `layouts/partials/` which looks like this:

{{< highlight html >}}
<script>
window.MathJax = {
  tex: {
    inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']],
    displayMath: [['$$','$$']],
    processEscapes: true,
    processEnvironments: true,
    tags: 'ams',
    autoload: {
      color: [],
      colorv2: ['color']
    },
    packages: {'[+]': ['noerrors']}
  },
  options: {
    skipHtmlTags: ['script', 'noscript', 'style', 'textarea', 'pre'],
    ignoreHtmlClass: 'tex2jax_ignore',
    processHtmlClass: 'tex2jax_process'
  },
  loader: {
    load: ['[tex]/noerrors']
  }
};
</script>
<script src="mathjax/tex-chtml.js" id="MathJax-script"></script>
{{< /highlight >}}

Note that I enabled inline math with single `$` as delimiter, which is not enabled by default (as it might clash with other uses of the `$` character).

This partial is then embedded into the `head.html` partial (the header of each content site) with
{{< highlight go >}}
  {{ if or .Params.math .Site.Params.math }}
    {{ partial "mathjax.html" . }}
  {{ end }}
{{< /highlight >}}


This was sufficient to get it up and working in my case.

You then get nicely formatted math when typing TeX syntax in your markdown files, e.g. $e^{i \pi} + 1 = 0$, or even automatically numbered equations (due to the `tags: 'ams'` setting):

\begin{equation}
  \psi^j_k(x) = 2^{-j/2} \psi\left(2^{-j}x-k\right)
\end{equation}



### Search

The current search of pulp does not work for me, although at the current small state of the website it is not crucial.

Most search implementations I found rely on `lunr.js` (also the one from the pulp theme), I will probably try at some future point to get this working at least for the Kuchenwiki.

[This guide](https://victoria.dev/blog/add-search-to-hugo-static-sites-with-lunr/) seems to be helpful, as it also talks about minifying.
Personally I used [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) to host a minified copy locally.
The further implementation into the site will have to wait.


### Conclusions

With this setup you can get text files with minimal effort rendered nicely on your website.
Using Markdown and [hugo shortcodes](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/) allows for quite some flexibility in formatting although I've used only very few of the available options.
